# Reverse Engineering (For Plugin Devs)

Reverse engineering an application is difficult. Reverse engineering a massive
game like Final Fantasy XIV is a lot more difficult. There are a lot of moving
parts, and opening a decompiler for the first time can be daunting to even
seasoned developers. It's very much out of scope of this documentation to teach
you _how_ to reverse engineer the game, but it can at least provide you some
guidance to figure things out by yourself.

## A Primer

Fundamentally, Final Fantasy XIV is running on your machine, which means it's
constantly running game code locally. This code is responsible for communicating
with the server, rendering the scene, drawing UI elements, determining what
state a player is in, and all sorts of other things. All of this happens within
the game's process and memory space, using instructions (generally, in assembly)
found in the `ffxiv_dx11.exe` file located on your computer.

There is, however, a problem here: we don't have Final Fantasy XIV's source
code. The final program they ship us is very stripped down, with very little
useful information present in it. To this end, the community has created and
maintained a project known as
[FFXIVClientStructs](https://github.com/aers/FFXIVClientStructs), which provides
a general source of information on the game internals and provides set of C#
bindings that effectively allow plugins to use the game as a library. However,
this documentation is incomplete and plugin developers will inevitably need to
reverse engineer the game itself to discover new things. Which leads us cleanly
to...

## How do I reverse engineer the game?

As alluded to before, a full guide on reverse engineering the game is impossible
to write. Reverse engineering is a very complex discipline and takes many years
to master. Developers with prior experience with C/C++ may have a slight head
start, but ultimately it's still a difficult puzzle to solve.

Within reverse engineering there are (at least) two major ways to interact with
programs to figure out how they tick: **Static Analysis** is when a developer
reads the game's disassembled or decompiled source code, often using tools
specifically designed for the purpose; and **Dynamic Analysis**, where debuggers
and memory editors are used to create breakpoints and notify on changes to
memory. Many developers will make heavy use of both of these mechanisms, as one
will often provide context to the other.

### Static Analysis

Static Analysis is the act of reading through a program's disassembled code,
often using an interactive disassembler or decompiler. There are many tools that
help with this process, such as [Hex-Rays IDA][ida], [Ghidra][ghidra], and
[Binary Ninja][binja], though others exist. The vast majority of the Dalamud
community will use either IDA or Ghidra for their work, and most tooling that
exists is built for one of these two tools. There's no functional difference to
either tool, so it's really up to the developer to choose which one they like
more.

Once you have your disassembler installed and working (you _did_ read the manual
and find some online tutorials for how to navigate it, right?), it's time to
load up `ffxiv_dx11.exe` and start poking around. At this point, most developers
will load in
[a few data files](https://github.com/aers/FFXIVClientStructs/tree/main/ida) and
use that to explore the program in question.

[ida]: https://hex-rays.com/
[ghidra]: https://github.com/NationalSecurityAgency/ghidra
[binja]: https://binary.ninja/

### Dynamic Analysis

Dynamic Analysis, unlike static analysis, is the act of inspecting what the code
is doing _live_. This is generally where tools like [Cheat
Engine][cheat-engine], [x64dbg][x64dbg], and [ReClass.NET][reclass-net] shine.
Developers will often use these programs to find interesting memory addresses or
place breakpoints on known data structures to see what game code affects a
certain location in memory.

Certain tools, such as
[pohky's XivReClassPlugin](https://github.com/pohky/XivReClassPlugin) will
additionally tie some dynamic analysis tools into the ClientStructs database,
allowing devs to move faster with access to more information.

[cheat-engine]: https://www.cheatengine.org/
[x64dbg]: https://x64dbg.com/
[reclass-net]: https://github.com/ReClassNET/ReClass.NET

## On Functions, Offsets, and Signatures

As alluded to before, Final Fantasy XIV is, in fact, a program. Programs, among
other things, tend to follow an execution flow starting from an _entrypoint_
(the first function called), going to other functions, spanning across threads,
responding to user input, and all sorts of other things that make the game
actually playable. The game will call a certain function on a specific user
action, or will use a function to fetch some relevant data or perform some
calculation for display in the UI or similar. All this to say: functions are
perhaps one of the most critical concepts to anyone exploring the game code.

Functions exist in the program's memory space, starting at a specific _offset_
from the program's base address. These function offsets uniquely identify a
specific function, and are generally expressed like `ffxiv_dx11.exe+4BC200`[^1]
in decompilers and other tools, though most developers will shorten this to just
`4BC200` when talking to each other. However, function offsets are not fixed.
Every individual version of the game will change all function offsets, meaning
they are effectively useless for use in plugins directly. Instead, developers
will use a different (and far more stable) unique identifier: the signature.

A _signature_ is a specific series of bytes (expressed as a hexadecimal string)
that uniquely identifies either the start of a function (known as a _direct
signature_) or a reference to a specific function (an _indirect signature_). For
example, take the signature `E8 ?? ?? ?? ?? 41 88 84 2C`. This string only
exists once in the game's binary, and uniquely identifies to a function that
checks if the player has completed a specific quest. Because a signature refers
to a part of the binary, it is far more stable - a signature will only break if
Square Enix changes the code the signature represents, or adds new code that
generates the same signature. It is not uncommon for signatures to last multiple
major patches. Signatures can either be made by hand by skilled developers, or a
tool like [Caraxi's SigMaker-x64](https://github.com/Caraxi/SigMaker-x64) can be
used to automatically generate one.

### Using Game Functions

There are two major ways that a developer can use a function: creating a hook to
intercept a function, or creating a delegate to use that function from their
plugin.

Developers will use hooks when they want to intercept, modify, cancel, or
otherwise act upon a function call. For example, a plugin that wants to know
when the user switches their status might hook an `UpdateStatus` function and
take some action on their own. Meanwhile, a developer that wants to just check
if the player has finished a quest would create a delegate pointing to an
`IsQuestCompleted` function so that they could call it at their will.

In both of these cases, the developer needs to know the argument list (and
return type) of the function they are interacting with, though static analysis
tools will expose this information to the developer[^2]. In many cases, not all
arguments are known (and will generally be represented as `a3` or similar), or
an argument may be a pointer to a specific (and potentially unknown!) struct.

## On Structures and Data Types

Structures are just C structures. We port them into C# sometimes, and we use
layouts. Pointer math is also a thing. We use intptr/nint a lot.

[^1]:
    Sometimes, you will also see `1404BC200`. This is the `/BASE` of
    `0x140000000` plus the function's offset, where the base address is ~~a cool
    coincidence~~ a property of
    [the compiler FFXIV uses](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/reference/base-base-address?view=msvc-170).

[^2]:
    Static analysis tools will use the
    [x64 calling conventions](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/x64-calling-convention)
    to figure out what arguments go where.
