# What's New in Dalamud v10

:::warning

Dalamud v10 is still under active development. This list is not yet exhaustive
and will be appended as we get closer to the intended release date.

:::

Dalamud v10 is the next major version of Dalamud, to be released together with
Patch 7.0. This is a high-level overview of changes. You can see a code diff of
all of these changes
[here.](https://github.com/goatcorp/dalamud/compare/master...apiX)

## Key Information

- **Branch:** `apiX`
  ([view on GitHub](https://github.com/goatcorp/Dalamud/tree/apiX))
- **Release Date:** Targeted to release alongside Patch 7.0 (estimated June
  2024).
- **API Level:** 10
- **.NET Version:** .NET 8.0

## New Features
- New APIs have been added.
  - `IConsole` lets you add console variables and commands to the Dalamud console(`/xllog`). These are distinct to chat commands and offer various convenience features such as completion and support for types. No string parsing needed.
  - `IMarketBoard` lets you access market board data events that Dalamud already had implemented to provide Universalis with it's pricing data. This will allow users to subscribe to these events without having to hook those events themselves. 

## Major Changes

- There has been refactoring in relation to what interfaces/classes Dalamud provides. Generally speaking Dalamud will now provide interfaces where possible. This should make it easier for plugins to unit test/mock as required.
  - The majority of public facing classes provided by dalamud services to plugins have been interfaced. 
  - `DalamudPluginInterface` is now `IDalamudPluginInterface`, you must request a `IDalamudPluginInterface` in your plugin's constructor.
  - `UiBuilder` is now `IUiBuilder`
  - For a full list please see [Interface Changes](#interface-changes)
 
- `ITextureProvider` has been reworked to be more performant and easier to use.
  - All of the functions inside now return a `ISharedImmediateTexture`, instead of a texture wrap. This represents an instance of a texture that may or may not be loaded yet. All textures are loaded asynchronously to avoid making the game hitch.
  - You don't need to maintain your own "texture cache" anymore. Caching `IDalamudTextureWrap` is now **explicitly discouraged**, as it sidesteps all of the asynchronous loading and performance optimizations in the new texture provider implementation. You should try to remove your caches and use `ISharedImmediateTexture.GetWrapOrEmpty()`, `ISharedImmediateTexture.GetWrapOrDefault()` or `ISharedImmediateTexture.TryGetWrap()`. The former `GetWrapOrEmpty()` function will return a transparent 4x4 texture if it hasn't loaded yet, allowing easy upgrades.
  - `ISharedImmediateTexture.RentAsync()` can be used to obtain a `IDalamudTextureWrap` that stays valid, but it's a **legacy option** and should only be used if you need to acquire a texture **off the main thread**, for example, inside a task. You should always prefer to use the other functions if you are planning to use the texture to render with ImGui.
  - Please refer to the updated documentation of `ITextureProvider` and `ISharedImmediateTexture` for more guidance.

- `ITextureReadbackProvider` has been added to allow accessing raw RGBA data of textures as streams, or saving them to a file.

## Minor Changes
- Some `IBattleChara` properties were renamed.
  - In `BattleChara`, `TotalCastTime` was renamed to `BaseCastTime`.
  - In `BattleChara`, `AdjustedTotalCastTime` was renamed to `TotalCastTime`.

- `Dalamud.ClientLanguage` was moved to `Dalamud.Game.ClientLanguage`.
  - The `ToLumina()` extension method was moved to `Dalamud.Utility`.
 
- `IDalamudPluginInstaller.OpenPluginInstaller()` was removed. Please use `OpenPluginInstallerTo()` instead.

- The type returned by `IDalamudPluginInterface.InstalledPlugins` has been changed to `IExposedPlugin`
  - Functions to open the main and config UIs have been added.

- Some changes were made to unify texture wraps.
  - The public `DalamudTextureWrap` class has been removed. Please use `IDalamudTextureWrap` instead.
  - `IDalamudTextureWrap` has been moved out of an internal namespace into `Dalamud.Interface.Textures.TextureWraps`

- `ImRaii` style functions will now throw if an invalid type is specified.

## Errata

These changes have been made after the official stabilization.

## Contributors

We want to thank the following people for their contributions to Dalamud during
this patch cycle:

## FFXIVClientStructs Changes

These are relevant changes made to FFXIVClientStructs, listed here for
reference. We want to thank aers, Pohky, WildWolf and the other
FFXIVClientStructs contributors for their work.
                                                            
## Class/Interface Changes
- DalamudPluginInterface -> IDalamudPluginInterface
- UiBuilder -> IUiBuilder
- AetheryteEntry -> IAetheryteEntry
- AetheryteList -> IAetheryteList
- BuddyMember -> IBuddyMember
- BuddyList -> IBuddyList
- GameObject -> IGameObject
- PlayerCharacter -> IPlayerCharacter
- BattleChara -> IBattleChara
- BattleNpc -> IBattleNpc
- Character -> ICharacter
- Npc -> INpc
- EventObj -> IEventObj
- Fate -> IFate
- PartyMember -> IPartyMember
- CommandInfo -> IReadOnlyCommandInfo
- MenuItem -> IMenuItem
- MenuArgs -> IMenuArgs
- MenuItemClickedArgs -> IMenuItemClickedArgs
- MenuOpenedArgs -> IMenuOpenedArgs
- DtrBarEntry -> IDtrBarEntry
- PartyFinderListing -> IPartyFinderListing
- PartyFinderListingEventArgs -> IPartyFinderListingEventArgs
- TitleScreenMenuEntry -> ITitleScreenMenuEntry and IReadOnlyTitleScreenMenuEntry
