# What's New in Dalamud v13

Dalamud v13 is the current major version of Dalamud, and will release with Patch
7.3. This is a high-level overview of changes. You can see a code diff of all of
these changes
[here.](https://github.com/goatcorp/Dalamud/compare/12.0.1.5...13.0.0.2)

## Key Information

- **Branch:** `api13`
  ([view on GitHub](https://github.com/goatcorp/Dalamud/tree/net3))
- **Release Date:** August 6, 2025
- **API Level:** 13
- **.NET Version:** .NET 9.0.3

:::warning\[Dalamud.NET.Sdk Migration]

If you haven't done so yet, we strongly recommend
[migrating your plugin project to Dalamud.NET.Sdk](/plugin-development/how-tos/v12-sdk-migration),
especially if you are still using a targets file to reference the Dalamud SDK.
We no longer plan to support the targets file in the next API level.

It includes the latest version of DalamudPackager, pinned to the current API
level, and will make it easier for us to introduce changes to how we distribute
SDK files in the future.

:::

## Major Changes

- Dalamud uses new bindings to the ImGui UI library, derived from
  Hexa.NET.ImGui, to improve offered APIs and facilitate an ImGui upgrade in the
  future.
  - Namespace and assembly changes:
    - `ImGuiNET` → `Dalamud.Bindings.ImGui`
    - `ImPlotNET` → `Dalamud.Bindings.ImPlot`
    - `ImGuizmoNET` → `Dalamud.Bindings.ImGuizmo`
  - If you use [Dalamud.NET.Sdk](/plugin-development/how-tos/v12-sdk-migration),
    the new binding assemblies are now automatically referenced in your project.
    If you don't, you will need to manually reference these three new assemblies
    and remove the reference to `ImGuiNET`.
  - ImGui internals are now accessible under the `Dalamud.Bindings.ImGui.ImGuiP`
    class.
    - Please note that these are still considered "unstable" and will require
      more work on your part to upgrade, once we upgrade ImGui.
  - `IDalamudTextureWrap.ImGuiHandle` was renamed to `Handle`.
  - Several text functions are now unformatted by default.
    - `ImGui.Text` now calls `ImGui.TextUnformatted` internally.
    - `ImGuiHelpers.SafeTextWrapped` was obsoleted, because `ImGui.TextWrapped`
      is safe now.
    - `ImGuiHelpers.SafeTextColoredWrapped` was obsoleted, because a new custom
      function `ImGui.TextColoredWrapped` was added.
  - [Utf8 Strings Literals](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/proposals/csharp-11.0/utf8-string-literals)
    are now supported (ImRaii included!).
  - To get an `ImGuiListClipperPtr` simply call `ImGui.ImGuiListClipper();`.
  - Capitalization of enum names is now in PascalCase, for example
    `ImGuiColorEditFlags.DisplayRGB` is now `ImGuiColorEditFlags.DisplayRgb`.
  - Functions that had `out` parameters now take those via pointer or `ref`.
- New ClientStructs-independent wrapper structs have been introduced for
  AtkUnitBase, AgentInterface and UIModule. Due to time constraints these
  currently only provide very basic (or in the case of UIModule no)
  functionality. They have `IsNull` and `Address` properties and are implicitly
  castable to `nint`. You're free to cast the Address field to another pointer
  type.

### IGameNetwork

The service was removed, as opcodes change every patch, making maintenance
arduous, and the packet data itself has proven itself to be very unreliable.

- Please hook functions that process the data instead - reach out on Discord if
  you are having issues with this, as doing this can be quite feature-specific.

### IAddonLifecycle

- `AddonArgs.Addon` is now of type `AtkUnitBasePtr`.

### IDalamudPluginInterface

- `AddChatLinkHandler`, and `RemoveChatLinkHandler` have been moved to the
  `IChatGui` service.
- `ActivePluginsChanged` is now called when a plugin loaded (with
  `PluginListInvalidationKind.Loaded`) or unloaded (with
  `PluginListInvalidationKind.Unloaded`).
  - Please note that enabling or disabling collections will trigger individual
    events for each plugin.

### IDtrBar

- `IReadOnlyDtrBarEntry.OnClick` now receives an `AddonMouseEventData`
  parameter.
  - `AddonMouseEventData` contains the following properties: `IsLeftClick`,
    `IsRightClick`, `IsNoModifier`, `IsAltHeld`, `IsControlHeld`, `IsShiftHeld`,
    `IsDragging`, `IsScrollUp`, `IsScrollDown`, `Position`.
- `IReadOnlyDtrBarEntry.TriggerClickAction` has been removed due to changes to
  `OnClick`.

### IGameGui

- `GetUIModule` now returns `UIModulePtr`.
- `GetAddonByName` now returns `AtkUnitBasePtr`.
- `GetAgentById` and the two `FindAgentInterface` functions now return
  `AgentInterfacePtr`.

### IObjectTable

- New enumerables have been added: `PlayerObjects`, `CharacterManagerObjects`,
  `ClientObjects`, `EventObjects`, `StandObjects` and `ReactionEventObjects`.

### IUiBuilder

- New events have been added: `DefaultGlobalScaleChanged`, `DefaultFontChanged`
  and `DefaultStyleChanged`.
- New properties have been added: `FontDefaultSizePt`, `FontDefaultSizePx`,
  `FontDefault`, `FontIcon`, `FontMono`.

## Minor Changes

- `Dalamud.Game.Text.SeStringHandling.Payloads.ItemPayload.ItemKind` was moved
  out of the ItemPayload, to the `Dalamud.Utility` namespace.
- `ISeStringEvaluator`: The service is no longer experimental and now supports
  the SheetSub and SwitchPlatform payloads.
- Lumina: The `ExtractText()` function on ReadOnlySeString and
  ReadOnlySeStringSpan does no longer need to be called. The `ToString()`
  function now returns text only (without soft hyphens!) and optionally provides
  formatting features (see
  [Lumina PR #109](https://github.com/NotAdam/Lumina/pull/109) for more
  information). The macro string output has been moved to a new
  `ToMacroString()` function.

## Packages

We have released new packages of the SDK and DalamudPackager for this Dalamud
API version.

- [Dalamud.NET.Sdk v13.0.0](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Dalamud.NET.Sdk/13.0.0)
  - To upgrade, change the header of your plugins' `.csproj` file:
    `<Project Sdk="Dalamud.NET.Sdk/13.0.0">`
- [DalamudPackager v13.0.0](https://www.nuget.org/packages/DalamudPackager/13.0.0)
  - You don't need to reference DalamudPackager manually if you use
    Dalamud.NET.Sdk, it is done for you.

## Contributors

We want to thank Marzent, Critical-Impact, Aireil, Haselnussbomber,
KirisameVanilla, kizer, zbee, nathanctech, AlexValliere, voidstar0, Cytraen,
Blooym, Jaksuhn, wolfcomp, ItsBexy, nebel, WorkingRobot and Infiziert90 for
their contributions during this patch cycle.

## FFXIVClientStructs Changes

FFXIVClientStructs will introduce their own breaking changes for Patch 7.3,
which will be documented
[on their docs page](https://ffxiv.wildwolf.dev/docs/breaking/7.3.html).

We want to thank aers, Caraxi, Haselnussbomber, Pohky, WildWolf and the other
FFXIVClientStructs contributors for their work.
