---
sidebar_position: -15
---

# What's New in Dalamud v15

:::warning[Not finalized]

This version is not finalized, and all details here are subject to change.

:::

Dalamud v15 is the current major version of Dalamud, and will release with Patch
7.5. This is a high-level overview of changes. You can see a code diff of all of
these changes
[here](https://github.com/goatcorp/Dalamud/compare/master...api15).

## Key Information

- **Branch:** `api15`
  ([view on GitHub](https://github.com/goatcorp/Dalamud/tree/api15))
- **Release Date:** TBA
- **API Level:** 15
- **.NET Version:** .NET 10.0.0

:::warning[Dalamud.NET.Sdk Migration]

If you haven't done so yet, we strongly recommend
[migrating your plugin project to Dalamud.NET.Sdk](/plugin-development/how-tos/v12-sdk-migration).

It includes the latest version of DalamudPackager, pinned to the current API
level, and will make it easier for us to introduce changes to how we distribute
SDK files in the future.

:::

## Major Changes

### New Features

### Changes to existing features

#### IChatGui

- The parameters passed to events were moved into an `IChatMessage` interface.  
  `IMutableChatMessage` contains setters for the `Sender` and `Message`
  properties.  
  `IHandleableChatMessage` contains a `PreventOriginal()` function to mark the
  message as handled.
- The value of `XivChatType` is now properly parsed and its previously packed
  relation data is now exposed via the `XivChatRelationKind` properties
  `SourceKind` and `TargetKind`.  
   This means that the `XivChatType` enum can now be used with its intended
  values, which are RowIds of the LogKind sheet.  
   Plugins that were previously relying on invalid, out-of-range `XivChatType`
  values (above 110) will need to update their logic.

Remember to try out the `LogMessage` event introduced in API 14, which may be a
suitable alternative for intercepting system messages.

## Minor Changes

### New Features

### IAgentLifecycle

- `PreventOriginal` function was added to allow you to prevent an event from being
  processed by the game. Example use-case: preventing the game from responding
  to certain kinds of ReceiveEvent calls.

- `Enable Agent Lifecycle` toggle added to `/xldev` bar allows you to disable the service and
  restore the original virtual tables for use in debugging/tracing calls. Re-enabling the service
  will reapply the virtual tables on next frame.

### IAddonLifecycle

- `PreventOriginal` function was added to allow you to prevent an event from being
  processed by the game. Example use-case: prevent the game from opening a window.

- `Enable Addon Lifecycle` toggle added to `/xldev` bar allows you to disable the service and
  restore the original virtual tables for use in debugging/tracing calls. Re-enabling the service
  will not affect already opened windows, they will need to be closed and re-opened to re-enable the hooks.

### Changes to existing features

### IClientState

- `ZoneInitEventArgs` was updated to use RowRefs. Additionally, the arrays
  `ActiveFestivals` and `ActiveFestivalPhases` were merged into a single
  `IReadOnlyList<FestivalEntry> ActiveFestivals`.

### IDutyState

- A new `IDutyStateEventArgs` interface is now passed to all events, which
  contains the previously passed TerritoryType RowId as RowRef.

### UiDebug Widget

- Widget will now show custom nodes by typename or custom name. If you are allocating nodes and attaching them to
  the games ui, you can use the DataShare name: `StringMappedCustomNodes` with type:
  `ConcurrentDictionary<nint, string>` to map an address to a label to be shown in UiDebug.

### Distributed manifest must be accurate

Up until now, when Dalamud installed a plugin, the `InternalName.json` file
inside the plugin zip archive would be overwritten with the manifest from the
repository. This is no longer the case to aid with consistency and a possible
future repo schema change, but this also means that you must ensure that your
zip contains a manifest and that it is accurate.

## SDK & Packages

We have released new packages of the SDK and DalamudPackager for this Dalamud
API version.

- [Dalamud.NET.Sdk v14.0.2](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Dalamud.NET.Sdk/14.0.2)
  - To upgrade, change the header of your plugins' `.csproj` file:
    `<Project Sdk="Dalamud.NET.Sdk/14.0.2">`
- [DalamudPackager v14.0.2](https://www.nuget.org/packages/DalamudPackager/14.0.2)
  - You don't need to reference DalamudPackager manually if you use
    Dalamud.NET.Sdk, it is done for you.

## Known Issues

## Contributors

We want to thank TODO.

## FFXIVClientStructs Changes

FFXIVClientStructs will introduce their own breaking changes for Patch 7.5,
which will be documented
[on their docs page](https://ffxiv.wildwolf.dev/docs/breaking/7.5.html).

We want to thank aers, Caraxi, Haselnussbomber, Pohky, WildWolf and the other
FFXIVClientStructs contributors for their work.
